---
title: 'PhD thoughts'
date: 2022-08-12
permalink: /posts/2012/08/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - cool posts
  - category1
  - category2
---

As my time as a PhD student draws to a close, I think it is an excellent time to reflect on my journey. This blog post will not involve the technicalities of my research (please see my thesis preamble, which is coming to this website soon!); instead, I collect my insights on my experience as a PhD student here. Whether you are considering pursuing a PhD or want to compare experiences, I hope you find this blog post helpful.

A little over four years ago, I decided to apply for PhDs. I was motivated by the enjoyment I encountered when learning physics in Durham and the pursuit of discovery. In my final semester at Durham, I was finally allowed to learn the secrets of General Relativity. The buzz around gravitational waves and the satisfying mathematics of Pseudo-Riemannian geometry drew me to modelling black hole binaries. Honestly, the main drive to apply was that I could find no other field of work which inspired me as physics does.

The first stages of my PhD were challenging; I had a comprehensive, intimidating reading list to grapple with before I started. Reading scientific writings is slow work. A major conclusion one draws when encountering literature in an unfamiliar field is ``there is so much I do not know''. Patience and perseverance are key. But, reading is not enough! Tackle problems from textbooks in the field; this is key to understanding problems and methods to solve them.

The next phase was choosing a research project. I was fortunate that I have an ambitious supervisor. My proposed project was to pioneer new methods in a bourgeoning field of research, as PhD projects should be. Still, the uncertainty of needing to find new methods which may not be possible was daunting. Fortunately, progress was made (by myself and other groups) so the project developed nicely.

Fortune is undoubtedly a key ingredient in a successful PhD. I have heard stories of students who have had less successful and enjoyable experiences—the luck of stumbling on a project with potential plays a crucial role. I have encountered two other significant parameters that determine the PhD experience. 

One is motivation. Why have you chosen to do a PhD? If it is for career prospects, money or just because you didn't want to leave University... then you are going to have a bad time. Suppose your decision to pursue a PhD is because you enjoy the challenge of research and spending hours, days, weeks, months, or years on a single project or problem. In that case, you are on the right track.

The second qualifier for the success of a PhD candidate is their supervisor. I was fortunate to have an understanding supervisor who was generous with their time. However, every supervisor is different (and none is perfect!), so prospective students must ask if a proposed supervisor suits their working style. A supervisor can make or break your PhD experience.

To conclude, I have thoroughly enjoyed completing my PhD. There have been significant challenges. Notably, covid, a house fire, moving country twice, interim reports, projects stalling for months, and a general sense that the world is in a mess. Nevertheless, the freedom and enjoyment conducting my PhD has offered me has been immense.